# FHIR B.O.S.S. (BaseX-Oriented Storage System)
FHIR B.O.S.S. is an implementation of a FHIR conformant Server, that sits infront of a BaseX database and performs all operations with XQuery. This allows for the server to be used with FHIR dependent subsystems while making it possible for the user to perform powerful queries on the underlying BaseX database.

## About
FHIR (Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources) is a standard developed by [HL7](https://www.hl7.org/) to assist data exchange for medical data. It combines the advantages of previous standards by HL7 while using common web-technologies to make it easy to implement. One of its core features is [FHIR-Search](http://hl7.org/fhir/search.html) to find data of interest in the database. While being good enough to create simple conditions for FHIR Resources it lacks the complexity to perform multi-step filtering in a single operation often requiring the implementation of additional processing layers for specific use cases. 

### Example
A simple application scenario: 

*Find all patients that had an assessment of passive range of motion where the assessment was not longer than 4 years ago.*

Finding assessments with the correct code could be done by performing a `_has` search: 
```
/Patient?_has:Procedure:patient:code=http://snomed.info/sct|710830005
```
however FHIR lacks the possibility to perform computations mid-search. So the time period has to be computed before added to the query (assume 09/07/2022 as today): 
```
/Patient?_has:Procedure:patient:code=http://snomed.info/sct|710830005&_has:Procedure:patient:date=ge2018-09-07
```
Thus having to adjust the query every time it is performed. 

<br>
XQuery is a much more flexible querying language that allows to implement functions to perform computations from within the query. 

With the following XQuery in BaseX:
```xquery
declare function local:isDateWithinYearRange($date as xs:date?, $year as xs:integer?) as xs:boolean? 
{
    (: format as yyyy-MM-dd :)
	let $boundary_date := xs:date(fn:concat(
        fn:string(year-from-date(current-date()) -$year), 
        '-', 
        fn:string(fn:format-number(month-from-date(current-date()), '00')), 
        '-', 
        fn:string(fn:format-number(day-from-date(current-date()), '00'))))
    
    return $date >= $boundary_date 
};

let $result := 

<results>
{
	for $x in db:open("Patient") 
    let $id := $x/Patient/id/@value
    
    let $refs := 
    <results>
    {
    	for $x in db:open("Procedure")
      
        where (
        	($x/Procedure/subject/reference[contains(@value, $id)]) and 
        	($x/Procedure/code/coding/code[contains(@value, "710830005")]) and
            local:isDateWithinYearRange($x/Procedure/performedDateTime/@value, 4)
        )
        return element result {$x}
    }
    </results>
   
   	for $procedure in $refs/result/Procedure
   	
    return $x
    
}
</results>

return $result
```
the query can be reperformed while not being dependent on the date, because the correct range is calculated while performing the query thus making it easier to automate the querying process. 
## Setup 

To start the Server create a `default.properties` file within a folder `settings` in the root of the project. The file has to contain the following information: 
```
basex.host=""
basex.port=
basex.username=""
basex.password=""
```
Build the project with the gradle commands `clean build` to create a .war file under `build/libs/fhirBoss.war`. Deploy the file on a Tomcat server.

Adjust the server.xml configuration to allow certain query characters.

Change 
```xml
<Connector port="8080" protocol="HTTP/1.1" connectionTimeout="20000" redirectPort="8443" />
```
to 
```xml
<Connector port="8080" protocol="HTTP/1.1" connectionTimeout="20000" redirectPort="8443" relaxedQueryChars='^{}[]|&quot;' />
```

The Server will be accessible from the URL `http://[base]/fhir/...`, with `[base]` being dependent on the tomcat deployment path. 

## Setup test server
To setup a test server one can easily use a local BaseX instance. Look [here](https://basex.org/) how to set it up correctly.
After that adjust the `default.properties` file and start the FHIR facade locally. Download the example FHIR resources in JSON format from the [official](https://hl7.org/fhir/downloads.html) website.
Put them into `src/main/resources/fhirResources/example-json` and run the main method of `BaseXPreparationUtil` in `src/main/kotlin/utils` to add all of them to the BaseX database.

## REST
FhirFacade is carefully modeled to conform to the [FHIR RESTful API](http://hl7.org/fhir/http.html) and the [FHIR Search](http://hl7.org/fhir/search.html) specifications.
To understand how this facade operates read those specifications throughout.

## Class Generator
The ResourceProviders are generated by HAPI-FHIRs [hapi-tinder-plugin](https://github.com/hapifhir/hapi-fhir/tree/master/hapi-tinder-plugin) with a customized velocity template. 
That way this server will be easily adjustable to changes to the FHIR standard and allows creating different versions for different FHIR versions (DSTU2, DSTU3, R4, R5). 
The template generator uses the information from the official Resource Java classes.
ResourceProviders will be automatically created during build phase and are located under `${projectRoot}/build/generated-sources`.
In its current state the Server is build to support FHIR version R4B specifically.

## Capabilities 
TODO: 